
TICC - Transactional Iterative Change Control

(Or: ITCH - Iterative Transaction CHanges?)

* Overview

Ticc is a system for iteratively managing changes to a database.

Ticc currently only works with PostgreSQL, and by design requires a
database management system that supports transactional DDL. Ticc may
work with other database management systems in the future. If you are
interested in adding support for other back-ends, that would be great!

** Why should you care?

You might be interested in this if you design databases, especially
with PostgreSQL. You may be interested in adapting it to whatever DBMS
you are using.

SQL is, in many ways, a terrible language, but it is the native
language of most modern DBMSs. Most migrations systems go through an
ORM that severely limits what you can do. Even if you are *accessing*
your data through an ORM, if you want to set up a powerful database
with more advanced features like views, rules, and triggers, if you
are trying in any way to design a quality database, you should want to
use the native DDL of your preferred DBMS.

This tool simply makes it easier to do so.

I would love to see more DMBSs supported in the future (and not
necessarily just SQL either), but for now, this is a PostgreSQL tool.

** Comparison between Sqitch and Ticc

Ticc is directly inspired by a similar project called [[http://sqitch.org/][Sqitch]]. Sqitch
is an awesome project and you should definitely check it out, too. I
will try to give some guidance in deciding which is right for you, but
I would recommend everybody doing SQL architecture use one or the
other.

Like Sqitch, Ticc is an attempt to take the pain out of iterative data
architecture, by giving you a framework to track a collection of
changes and deploy or revert them as needed. Both projects focus on
using the native DDL of your database, both are intended to work well
with version control software like Git, and both are simple command
line tools.

*** Advantages to Sqitch

I am biased - I wrote Ticc and think it's the way to go - but Sqitch
is still great and there are definitely reasons some may use Sqitch.

The largest advantage to Sqitch as I see it is support for other
back-ends. Ticc currently only supports PostgreSQL and due to feature
differences, can *never* support as many back-end DBMSs as Sqitch.
Sqitch can support DBMSs that do not have transactional DDL, or that
do not have nested transactions or save-points; Ticc depends on those
features.

Some may also prefer the Sqitch approach. Sqitch has explicitly
written transactions inside change files, and follows a single clear
linear plan file which you can edit yourself, deciding *exactly* how
your plan will deploy, rather than letting the tool figure it out for
you.

If anybody has more reasons they love Sqitch, please share!

*** Advantages to Ticc

Ticc manages transactions for you, and protects entire actions. This
means that every time you issue a Ticc command, you can be sure it
will either complete correctly, or fail and leave the database as it
was, with no need to clean up.

Ticc ensures that every change is not only deployable, but verifiable
and revertable, before committing it's deployment. This means that you
can work safely and not worry about breaking the synchronization of
the Ticc plan and the actual database.

Ticc uses a previously tested script to revert each change when
needed, so a bad revert script will never leave you with a change that
cannot be reverted.

Ticc offers a single command, =ticc sync=, that will do the right
thing nearly all the time. It reverts any changes that are necessary
based on your modifications to the master plan, and then deploys
everything to make your deployed database match the plan.

* Usage

Ticc works by constructing a master plan from a collection of DDL
change files and plan fragments. The first thing you need is a project
directory to keep your plan in. It is best to keep this in a source
control repository like Git.

Every directory - the top level project directory and every directory
under it - is considered to represent a "change", although they need
not all actually change something in your database.

** Change dependencies

You may nest changes under other changes. Change attributes, such as
dependencies, are inherited by the changes beneath it, and every
change implicitly depends on all the changes beneath it. Suppose that
if you have:

- =Change A=
  - =Change A1=
- =Change B= (explicitly depends on =Change A=)
  - =Change B1=

=Change B1= will inherit the explicit dependency, so it also depends
on =Change A=. =Change A= implicitly depends on =Change A1=. =Change
B= implicitly depends on =Change B1=. Therefore, these *must* be
performed in the following order:

- =Change A1=
- =Change A=
- =Change B1=
- =Change B=

You may find it useful to group changes with similar dependencies
under a common directory where those can be defined.

** Configuration

The config file defaults to ticc.json in the root of your plan.

Currently there is a single top level configuration key, =database=,
which can contain sub-keys to configure the database Ticc should
connect to.

- =database= :: Configure the database connection

  - =engine= :: The PHP PDO engine to connect with. The default and
       only supported option is =pgsql=. You can try other PDO
       engines if you like, but no handling for other engines has been
       added, so I have no idea what it would do.

  - =host= :: The database host to connect to. Defaults to no host,
       which with the pgsql engine will connect to a local PostgreSQL
       over a socket.

  - =port= :: The database port

  - =name= :: The name of the database

  - =ticc schema= :: The schema for Ticc to keep it's own data in.
       Defaults to =ticc=, which should be fine, if it doesn't
       conflict with something else.

If you are using PostgreSQL running on your local machine, you
probably only need something like:

#+begin_src javascript
  {
      "database": {
          "name": "my_database"
      }
  }
#+end_src

** Plan structure

Rationale: Dependencies should be defined close to the sql files they
describe. When looking at any directory, we should not see multiple
items representing the same thing, such as a plan file and a directory
it describes.

Each directory in the plan represents a /change/. Each /change/ may
optionally contain any of:

- A =plan.json= file providing attributes for this change (and
  possibly /sub-changes/)

- A set of scripts describing how to deploy this /change/. If any are
  present, they all must be:
  - =deploy.sql= :: DDL to deploy the /change/
  - =verify.sql= :: A statement which will only succeed if the /change/
       was successfully deployed, such as selecting from a created
       table
  - =revert.sql= :: DDL to revert the /change/

- One or more directories representing /changes/ that should inherit
  attributes from this one.

** Commands

*** ticc deploy

Deploy the master plan (the one represented by your plan directories).
Does not re-deploy any already deployed changes (by name, even if they
are different from the version deployed).

*** ticc revert

Revert all deployed changes.

*** ticc sync

Revert any changes that are in name or script different from the
master plan, as well as any changes which depend directly or
indirectly on those; then deploy all undeployed changes. This should
sync your deployed database up with the master plan, and is usually
the only command you should need.

* Justifications

** Why PHP?

I know a lot of languages. I am often tinkering around in Lisp.
However, PHP is the language I know best, simply because people keep
insisting on paying me to write stuff in it. I considered node.js for
this as it's what I'm learning right now, but I had a practical and
immediate need for Ticc, so I decided to do it in PHP as I could get
it working fastest that way. I am still considering rewriting it in a
different language.

** What's this weird code style?

I have followed quite a number of code style guides in different
places I've worked. I have my own opinions on what makes good style,
and they are all based on practical experience and reasons. Since this
is a personal project and, again, I wanted to get it running quickly,
I've used my own style. I may add a style guide to this project
explaining the actual reasons, but in the mean time, give it a try -
if you get used to it, I bet you will prefer it.

** Why aren't there interfaces? Dependency injection? Unit tests?

There isn't a great reason here. Mostly I was just rushing to get this
to the point where it would be useful to me, developing as a single
coder rather than on a team, and it's a small project that is pretty
manageable as-is. However, I would welcome pull requests improving all
these things.

* Requirements

- At least PHP7
- A Postgres server (version to come)
